@node Contributors, Free Manuals, Maintenance, Top
@c %MENU% Who wrote what parts of the GNU C library
@appendix Contributors to the GNU C Library

The GNU C library was written originally by Roland McGrath, and is
currently maintained by Ulrich Drepper.  Some parts of the library were
contributed or worked on by other people.

@itemize @bullet
@item
The @code{getopt} function and related code was written by
Richard Stallman, @w{David J.} MacKenzie, and @w{Roland McGrath}.

@item
The merge sort function @code{qsort} was written by Michael J. Haertel.

@item
The quick sort function used as a fallback by @code{qsort} was written
by Douglas C. Schmidt.

@item
The memory allocation functions @code{malloc}, @code{realloc} and
@code{free} and related code were written by Michael J. Haertel,
@w{Wolfram Gloger}, and @w{Doug Lea}.

@item
Fast implementations of many of the string functions (@code{memcpy},
@code{strlen}, etc.) were written by Torbj@"orn Granlund.

@item
The @file{tar.h} header file was written by David J. MacKenzie.

@item
The port to the MIPS DECStation running Ultrix 4
(@code{mips-dec-ultrix4})
was contributed by Brendan Kehoe and Ian Lance Taylor.

@item
The DES encryption function @code{crypt} and related functions were
contributed by Michael Glad.

@item
The @code{ftw} and @code{nftw} functions were contributed by Ulrich Drepper.

@item
The startup code to support SunOS shared libraries was contributed by
Tom Quinn.

@item
The @code{mktime} function was contributed by Paul Eggert.

@item
The port to the Sequent Symmetry running Dynix version 3
(@code{i386-sequent-bsd}) was contributed by Jason Merrill.

@item
The timezone support code is derived from the public-domain timezone
package by Arthur David Olson and his many contributors.

@item
The port to the DEC Alpha running OSF/1 (@code{alpha-dec-osf1}) was
contributed by Brendan Kehoe, using some code written by Roland McGrath.

@item
The port to SGI machines running Irix 4 (@code{mips-sgi-irix4}) was
contributed by Tom Quinn.

@item
The port of the Mach and Hurd code to the MIPS architecture
(@code{mips-@var{anything}-gnu}) was contributed by Kazumoto Kojima.

@item
The floating-point printing function used by @code{printf} and friends
and the floating-point reading function used by @code{scanf},
@code{strtod} and friends were written by Ulrich Drepper.  The
multi-precision integer functions used in those functions are taken from
GNU MP, which was contributed by Torbj@"orn Granlund.

@item
The internationalization support in the library, and the support
programs @code{locale} and @code{localedef}, were written by Ulrich
Drepper.  Ulrich Drepper adapted the support code for message catalogs
(@file{libintl.h}, etc.) from the GNU @code{gettext} package, which he
also wrote.  He also contributed the @code{catgets} support and the
entire suite of multi-byte and wide-character support functions
(@file{wctype.h}, @file{wchar.h}, etc.).

@item
The implementations of the @file{nsswitch.conf} mechanism and the files
and DNS backends for it were designed and written by Ulrich Drepper and
Roland McGrath, based on a backend interface defined by Peter Eriksson.

@item
The port to Linux i386/ELF (@code{i386-@var{anything}-linux}) was
contributed by Ulrich Drepper, based in large part on work done in
Hongjiu Lu's Linux version of the GNU C Library.

@item
The port to Linux/m68k (@code{m68k-@var{anything}-linux}) was
contributed by Andreas Schwab.

@item
The ports to Linux/ARM (@code{arm-@var{ANYTHING}-linuxaout}) and ARM
standalone (@code{arm-@var{ANYTHING}-none}), as well as parts of the
IPv6 support code, were contributed by Philip Blundell.

@item
Richard Henderson contributed the ELF dynamic linking code and other
support for the Alpha processor.

@item
David Mosberger-Tang contributed the port to Linux/Alpha
(@code{alpha-@var{anything}-linux}).

@item
The port to Linux on PowerPC (@code{powerpc-@var{anything}-linux})
was contributed by Geoffrey Keating.

@item
Miles Bader wrote the argp argument-parsing package, and the argz/envz
interfaces.

@item
Stephen R. van den Berg contributed a highly-optimized @code{strstr} function.

@item
Ulrich Drepper contributed the @code{hsearch} and @code{drand48}
families of functions; reentrant @samp{@dots{}@code{_r}} versions of the
@code{random} family; System V shared memory and IPC support code; and
several highly-optimized string functions for i@var{x}86 processors.

@item
The math functions are taken from @code{fdlibm-5.1} by Sun
Microsystems, as modified by J.T. Conklin, Ian Lance Taylor,
Ulrich Drepper, Andreas Schwab, and Roland McGrath.

@item
The @code{libio} library used to implement @code{stdio} functions on
some platforms was written by Per Bothner and modified by Ulrich Drepper.

@item
Eric Youngdale and Ulrich Drepper implemented versioning of objects on
 symbol level.

@item
Thorsten Kukuk provided an implementation for NIS (YP) and NIS+,
securelevel 0, 1 and 2.

@item
Andreas Jaeger provided a test suite for the math library.

@item
Mark Kettenis implemented the utmpx interface and an utmp daemon.

@item
Ulrich Drepper added character conversion functions (@code{iconv}).

@item
Thorsten Kukuk provided an implementation for a caching daemon for NSS
(nscd).

@item
Tim Waugh provided an implementation of the POSIX.2 wordexp function family.

@item
Mark Kettenis provided a Hesiod NSS module.

@item
The Internet-related code (most of the @file{inet} subdirectory) and
several other miscellaneous functions and header files have been
included from 4.4 BSD with little or no modification.

All code incorporated from 4.4 BSD is under the following copyright:

@quotation
@display
Copyright @copyright{} 1991 Regents of the University of California.
All rights reserved.
@end display

Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
are met:

@enumerate
@item
Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
@item
Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
@item
[This condition was removed.]
@item
Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
without specific prior written permission.
@end enumerate

@sc{this software is provided by the regents and contributors ``as is'' and
any express or implied warranties, including, but not limited to, the
implied warranties of merchantability and fitness for a particular purpose
are disclaimed.  in no event shall the regents or contributors be liable
for any direct, indirect, incidental, special, exemplary, or consequential
damages (including, but not limited to, procurement of substitute goods
or services; loss of use, data, or profits; or business interruption)
however caused and on any theory of liability, whether in contract, strict
liability, or tort (including negligence or otherwise) arising in any way
out of the use of this software, even if advised of the possibility of
such damage.}
@end quotation

@item
The random number generation functions @code{random}, @code{srandom},
@code{setstate} and @code{initstate}, which are also the basis for the
@code{rand} and @code{srand} functions, were written by Earl T. Cohen
for the University of California at Berkeley and are copyrighted by the
Regents of the University of California.  They have undergone minor
changes to fit into the GNU C library and to fit the @w{ISO C} standard,
but the functional code is Berkeley's.@refill

@item
The DNS resolver code is taken directly from BIND 4.9.5, which is
under both the Berkeley copyright above and also:

@quotation
Portions Copyright @copyright{} 1993 by Digital Equipment Corporation.

Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies, and
that the name of Digital Equipment Corporation not be used in
advertising or publicity pertaining to distribution of the document or
software without specific, written prior permission.

@sc{the software is provided ``as is'' and digital equipment corp.
disclaims all warranties with regard to this software, including all
implied warranties of merchantability and fitness.  in no event shall
digital equipment corporation be liable for any special, direct,
indirect, or consequential damages or any damages whatsoever resulting
from loss of use, data or profits, whether in an action of contract,
negligence or other tortious action, arising out of or in connection
with the use or performance of this software.}
@end quotation

@item
The code to support Sun RPC is taken verbatim from Sun's
@w{@sc{rpcsrc-4.0}} distribution, and is covered by this copyright:

@quotation
@display
Copyright @copyright{} 1984, Sun Microsystems, Inc.
@end display

Sun RPC is a product of Sun Microsystems, Inc. and is provided for
unrestricted use provided that this legend is included on all tape media
and as a part of the software program in whole or part.  Users may copy
or modify Sun RPC without charge, but are not authorized to license or
distribute it to anyone else except as part of a product or program
developed by the user.

@sc{sun rpc is provided as is with no warranties of any kind including the
warranties of design, merchantibility and fitness for a particular
purpose, or arising from a course of dealing, usage or trade practice.}

Sun RPC is provided with no support and without any obligation on the
part of Sun Microsystems, Inc. to assist in its use, correction,
modification or enhancement.

@sc{sun microsystems, inc. shall have no liability with respect to the
infringement of copyrights, trade secrets or any patents by sun rpc
or any part thereof.}

In no event will Sun Microsystems, Inc. be liable for any lost revenue
or profits or other special, indirect and consequential damages, even if
Sun has been advised of the possibility of such damages.

@display
Sun Microsystems, Inc.
2550 Garcia Avenue
Mountain View, California  94043
@end display
@end quotation

@item
Some of the support code for Mach is taken from Mach 3.0 by CMU,
and is under the following copyright terms:

@quotation
@display
Mach Operating System
Copyright @copyright{} 1991,1990,1989 Carnegie Mellon University
All Rights Reserved.
@end display

Permission to use, copy, modify and distribute this software and its
documentation is hereby granted, provided that both the copyright
notice and this permission notice appear in all copies of the
software, derivative works or modified versions, and any portions
thereof, and that both notices appear in supporting documentation.

@sc{carnegie mellon allows free use of this software in its ``as is''
condition.  carnegie mellon disclaims any liability of any kind for
any damages whatsoever resulting from the use of this software.}

Carnegie Mellon requests users of this software to return to

@display
 Software Distribution Coordinator
 School of Computer Science
 Carnegie Mellon University
 Pittsburgh PA 15213-3890
@end display

@noindent
or @email{Software.Distribution@@CS.CMU.EDU} any improvements or
extensions that they make and grant Carnegie Mellon the rights to
redistribute these changes.
@end quotation

@item
The code for the database library @file{libdb} comes from the 2.3
release of Berkeley DB. That code is under the same copyright as 4.4 BSD
and also:

@quotation
@display
Copyright @copyright{} 1990, 1993, 1994, 1995, 1996, 1997
Sleepycat Software.  All rights reserved.
@end display

Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
are met:

@enumerate
@item
Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
@item
Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
@item
Redistributions in any form must be accompanied by information on
how to obtain complete source code for the DB software and any
accompanying software that uses the DB software.  The source code
must either be included in the distribution or be available for no
more than the cost of distribution plus a nominal fee, and must be
freely redistributable under reasonable conditions.  For an
executable file, complete source code means the source code for all
modules it contains.  It does not mean source code for modules or
files that typically accompany the operating system on which the
executable file runs, e.g., standard library modules or system
header files.
@end enumerate

@sc{this software is provided by sleepycat software ``as is'' and
any express or implied warranties, including, but not limited to, the
implied warranties of merchantability and fitness for a particular purpose
are disclaimed.  in no event shall sleepycat software be liable
for any direct, indirect, incidental, special, exemplary, or consequential
damages (including, but not limited to, procurement of substitute goods
or services; loss of use, data, or profits; or business interruption)
however caused and on any theory of liability, whether in contract, strict
liability, or tort (including negligence or otherwise) arising in any way
out of the use of this software, even if advised of the possibility of
such damage.}

@display
Portions copyright @copyright{} 1995, 1996
The President and Fellows of Harvard University.
All rights reserved.
@end display

Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
are met:
@enumerate
@item
Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
@item
Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
@item
All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
must display the following acknowledgement:
@quotation
 This product includes software developed by Harvard University
 and its contributors.
@end quotation
@item
Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
without specific prior written permission.
@end enumerate

@sc{this software is provided by harvard and its contributors ``as is'' and
any express or implied warranties, including, but not limited to, the
implied warranties of merchantability and fitness for a particular purpose
are disclaimed.  in no event shall harvard or its contributors be liable
for any direct, indirect, incidental, special, exemplary, or consequential
damages (including, but not limited to, procurement of substitute goods
or services; loss of use, data, or profits; or business interruption)
however caused and on any theory of liability, whether in contract, strict
liability, or tort (including negligence or otherwise) arising in any way
out of the use of this software, even if advised of the possibility of
such damage.}

@noindent
For a license to use, redistribute or sell DB software under conditions
other than those described above, or to purchase support for this
software, please contact Sleepycat Software at

@display
 Sleepycat Software
 394 E. Riding Dr.
 Carlisle, MA 01741
 USA
 +1-508-287-4781
@end display

or @email{db@@sleepycat.com}.

@end quotation

@end itemize
